Blockchain
Interoperability
    Abstract
    This paper summarizes the initial exploration
    and findings of the World Bank Group Technology &
    Innovation Lab, in partnership with the IMF’s Digital
    Advisory Unit, on blockchain interoperability and
    some of the related approaches and efforts being
    carried out by blockchain innovators and other
    institutions. It covers the use cases and technical
    approaches of the different blockchain platforms
    used to exchange information and assets, as well
    as the experimentation the group conducted in the
    area of interoperability. The paper further identifies
2
    interoperability issues which needs more attention
    and provides guidance to practitioners.

    Blockchain Interoperability Working Group: A Team
    of Technology Practitioners from the World Bank
    Group Information and Technology Solutions and
    IMF’s Digital Advisory Unit. Since 2017, the World
    Bank Group Technology & Innovation Lab has
    partnered with the IMF’s Digital Advisory Unit to
    explore blockchain and distributed ledger technology
    (DLT), including through the Learning Coin Project.1



    1   https://www.ft.com/content/1cfb6d46-5d5a-11e9-939a-341f5ada9d40



    WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Acknowledgements
WBG, Information Technology Solutions Technology and Innovation Lab (ITSTI)
Yusuf Karacaoglu, Stela Mocan, Emmanuel Ayanfe Crown, Rachel Alexandra Halsema,
Mahesh Chandrahas Karajgi, Han Wang, Raunak Mittal, Mert Ozdag, Ani Popiashvili

WBG Information Technology Solutions, Treasury (ITSTR)
Peter Z.Y. Zhou

WBG Information Technology Solutions, Risk and Compliance (ITSSR)
Zhijun William Zhang

IBRD Legal
Patricia Miranda, Menaka Kalaskar

IMF Digital Advisory
Herve Tourpe, Soheib Nunhuck, Chitranjan Zaroo


This is a Working Paper that describe research in progress by the contributor(s) and
are published to elicit comments and to encourage debate. The views expressed in are
those of the contributors(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF/WB,   3
its Executive Board, or IMF/WB management.




Blockchain Interoperability								Acknowledgements
Contents
Part One: The Case for Blockchain Interoperability	7

Part Two: The Current State of Blockchain Interoperability	11
Existing Standards	                                                          11
Past Projects and Implementations in the financial sector	                   15


Part Three: A Framework for Blockchain Interoperability 	17
The Business Perspective	                                                    17
The Technology Perspective 	                                                 18
The Security and Risk Perspective 	                                          24
Legal Considerations	                                                        25


Part Four: Working Group Explorations and Lessons Learned	33

Part Five: Concluding Thoughts and Implications for International Development	45

Glossary	47

Endnotes	49

Appendices	51
Project Jasper (Bank of Canada)	                                             52
Project Ubin. Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS)	                         53
Project Stella	                                                              55
Executive Summary
Blockchain technology has been a core element of the so-called “digital revolution” for the
last 10 years. As the COVID-19 crisis accelerates the digitalization of finance, commerce and
trade, it is likely that blockchain-related projects will continue to grow in number. The technol-
ogy is often praised for providing distinct advantages over traditional centralized databases,
notably due to blockchain’s distributed architecture, involving many public or private partici-
pants (or nodes), which is thought to offer superior resilience, as well its security-by-design,
tamper-proof protocol, which its supporters believe guarantees the protection of its users’
personal data and other hosted assets. As more solutions are beginning to rely on blockchain
technology, it is becoming increasingly evident that the evolution of this technology is being
held back by the lack of interoperability across blockchain solutions, other systems such as
traditional IT solutions, or other emerging technology.
This paper reviews blockchain interoperability through the lenses of business, technol-
ogy, security and risk, as well as legal considerations, and can be used as a reference
to support further work on blockchain interoperability. We summarize our exploration agen-
da to date, along with key lessons learned from experimenting with interoperability across
several blockchain platforms, e.g. Ethereum, Hyperledger Fabric, Corda and Quorum.
Our intent is to share knowledge and promote awareness of blockchain interoperability.
We identify areas where further technical development, standards and architecture pat-
terns are needed, and provide guidance to practitioners in building open and sustainable             5
blockchain solutions.




Blockchain Interoperability								Executive Summary
    ONE
    The Case for
    Blockchain
6
    Interoperability




    WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
The Case for
Blockchain Interoperability
There is no common definition of interoperability. For the purpose of this paper, the
following definition of interoperatibility serves as a guide for the reader:

    The ability to exchange data with other platforms, including those running different
    types of blockchains, as well as with the off-chain world (EU Blockchain Observatory
    and Forum, 2019).

This definition has to be understood not only at the application and technology levels, but
also with respect to its business, security, and legal considerations (see Part III). Realizing
the potential of Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLT) will require focusing on interoperabil-
ity. Breaking siloes and walled gardens of data and applications are some of the many ben-
efits presented by this emerging technology. However, these benefits will not materialize in
the absence of interoperability among different blockchain protocols, blockchain and other
emerging and legacy technologies, which may well leave us with the same original problems.
Blockchain or distributed ledger interoperability is a complex and complicated challenge to
tackle. As we move towards the operationalization of this emerging technology, interopera-
bility will come to the fore as issue of pressing importance. The different types and designs
                                                                                                               7
of the core shared distributed ledger can be broadly classified as being either permissioned
and permissionless blockchain networks. Institutions and organizations have been exploring
DLT technology protocols on the basis of their respective needs and the requirements of the
challenge statement at hand. And since multiple blockchain networks are evolving, it is now
critical for these different systems not just be able to interoperate with legacy systems but
also be able to communicate across different distributed ledgers. This could be more easily
understood through the presentation of a few examples:
Central Banking and Digital Payments: Several central banks have begun to trial block-
chain for practical interoperability experiments. In 2019, the Monetary Authority of Singa-
pore and Bank of Canada collaborated on a project to demonstrate the interoperability of
two major blockchain networks – Corda and Quorum – using Hashed Time-Locked Con-
tracts (HTLC).2 Project Stella (more information on the project is available in the Annex),
conducted by the European Central Bank (ECB) and Bank of Japan (BoJ), explored how
cross-ledger Delivery versus Payment (DvP) can work between two individual ledgers with-
out a direct connection. Thailand’s central bank also worked with the Hong Kong Monetary




2    Jasper–Ubin Design Paper Enabling Cross-Border High Value Transfer Using Distributed Ledger
    “
     Technologies,” May 2, 2019.




Blockchain Interoperability					                                    The Case for Blockchain Interoperability
    Authority (HKMA) on cross-border funds transfers using blockchain.3 With the launch of
    the Libra project in 2019, the conversation around stablecoins – and Central Bank Digi-
    tal Currency (CBDC) – has accelerated. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic, which re-
    quired social isolation and limited face-to-face commerce, has reinforced the importance
    of digital payment schemes. However, various existing data standards and communica-
    tion protocols in payment networks, often proprietary networks, are leading to payment
    processing delays. Rapid change and innovation is taking place in payment technologies,
    which are enabling faster, cheaper, efficient domestic and cross-border payments – one of
    the key paradigms will be interoperability between these different channels. In the same
    spirit of collaborative learning, this White Paper seeks to build a better understanding on
    interoperability.
    Digital Identity: Blockchain technology has become the driving force of the so-called “de-
    centralized Internet Web 3.0”, which requires interoperability and scalability to enable
    end-users to control and share data, or settle agreements with other parties, through the
    Internet in a trustworthy manner.4 Digital identity cannot be locked in one platform –it
    needs interoperability across multiple platforms, and provide more choice to the end-user.
    This need has led to a concerted effort by various private sector and not-for-profit enti-
    ties to work towards creating open standards for digital identity. The verifiable credential
    framework developed by the W3C Working Group is an approach aimed at ensuring that
    the sharing and verification of digital credentials can operate smoothly across different un-
    derlying technology protocols. This will be critical for the openness that is needed in digital
    identity systems.
    Supply Chains: Interoperability is also expected to benefit the supply chain environment.
8   One of the key challenges in supply chain systems is the lack of interoperability between
    the different data systems of supply chain actors. While blockchain-based supply chains
    could bring various advantages to fragmented supply chain systems, its implementation
    will face various challenges. One of these challenges is the interoperability between dis-
    tributed ledgers and the existing high volume of legacy software systems, e.g. the Enter-
    prise Resource Planning (ERP) software system.5
    Healthcare: In the healthcare space, interoperability has been a challenge as a complex
    ecosystem of vendors, providers, regulators and patients seek to exchange and manage
    access to healthcare data across different systems and organizations. Healthcare Infor-
    mation and Management Systems Society (HIMSS) has examined how blockchain tech-
    nology can be leveraged to achieve on-chain and off-chain helath data interoperability.6




    3   Shen, Alice. 2019. “Thai Central Bank to Work with HKMA on Cross-Border Blockchain.” Central Bank-
        
        ing, August 6. Available at: https://www.centralbanking.com/central-banks/financial-market-infrastruc-
        ture/4359381/thai-central-bank-to-work-with-hkma-on-cross-border-blockchain.
    4   “Web3 - The Decentralized Web.” BlockchainHub, August 29, 2019. http://blockchainhub.net/web3-decen-
        
        tralized-web/.
    5    ttps://mneguidelines.oecd.org/Is-there-a-role-for-blockchain-in-responsible-supply-chains.pdf	
        h
    6   "Interoperability: Why and How Providers Should Pursue It.” CGAP, September 2019. https://www.cgap.org/
        
        research/publication/interoperability-why-and-how-providers-should-pursue-it.




    WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
In recent years, multilateral institutions and national governments have taken concrete
actions to further the development of blockchain networks. The Innovation Lab of the In-
ter-American Development Bank (IDB Lab) developed a blockchain ecosystem – LAC-
Chain – as a global blockchain alliance. Among LACChain’s main objectives are the devel-
opment, promotion and adoption of standards that allow interoperability of networks, and
the scalability of blockchain technology and its applications. 7Along with LACChain, the
International Association for Trusted Blockchain Applications (INATBA) has organized a
series of online discussions to highlight the value of blockchain interoperability and other
interoperability issues.8 These sessions were attended by representatives of multilateral,
governmental and private sector organizations.
China is about to launch its own national blockchain platform, which forms part of the coun-
try’s strategy to digitally transform its economy. The platform will have important implica-
tions for its trading partners. The protocol at launch will be interoperable with major block-
chain platforms and frameworks.9 A number of other national governments have developed
national strategies for blockchain adoption as well, including India10 and Germany.11 Finally,
the World Economic Forum has issued a number of guidance notes and toolkits to assist
public and private players in furthering their work in this area, including the Blockchain
Deployment Toolkit for Supply Chains.12




                                                                                                                    9




7    LACChain Alliance. “What Is the LACChain Global Alliance?” Medium. Medium, March 5, 2020. https://
     
     medium.com/@lacchain.official/what-is-the-lacchain-global-alliance-and-what-does-it-consist-of-
     861cb76257b1.
8    INATBA Convenes Global Conversation on Standards, Governance and Interoperability (2020, May 30). Re-
     
     trieved July 01, 2020, from https://medium.com/@INATBA/inatba-convenes-global-conversation-on-stan-
     dards-governance-and-interoperability-cacd898a60e1.
9    Sung, Michael. “Michael Sung: China’s National Blockchain Will Change the World.” CoinDesk, April 27,
     
     2020. https://www.coindesk.com/chinas-national-blockchain-will-change-the-world.
10   “Blockchain: The India Strategy Towards Enabling Ease of Business, Ease of Living, and Ease of Gover-
     
     nance.” NITI Aayog, January 2020.
11   “German Government Adopts Blockchain Strategy - Federal Ministry of Finance - Issues.” Bundesministe-
     
     rium der Finanzen, September 18, 2019. http://www.bundesfinanzministerium.de/Content/EN/Standardar-
     tikel/Topics/Financial_markets/Articles/2019-09-18-Blockchain.html.
12   World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. “Redesigning Trust: Blockchain Deployment Toolkit.” Available at:
     
     https://widgets.weforum.org/blockchain-toolkit/.




Blockchain Interoperability					                                         The Case for Blockchain Interoperability
     TWO
     The Current
     State of
10
     Blockchain
     Interoperability



     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
The Current State of
Blockchain Interoperability
Existing Standards
The problem of blockchain standards–relevant and necessary for interoperability–
extends beyond the technical perspective and involves standardization in the business and
legal spheres.
Blockchain technology has been used to develop various proofs of concepts and pilots, and
is now being increasingly explored to deploy its applications in live production environments.
International development agencies are actively pursuing this novel technology to address
some complex and sticky problems pertaining to developing and emerging markets. How-
ever, the industry recognizes that this technology is still in the early stages of adoption, and
that it is continuously evolving through new experiments and improvements. In this context,
it is not surprising that blockchain standards are, as of today, fragmented, with uneven rep-
resentation from emerging economies. In a 2019 analysis of ISO/TC 307 (blockchain and
distributed ledger technologies), only three African countries were members, with only one
country – South Africa – serving in a participating role.13 In the past year, that number has
risen to two, with the addition of Nigeria as a participating country. Given the active work be-
ing conducted in several African countries to explore and understand the potential of block-
chain, the inconsistent participation in standards groups at the national level could have im-         11
plications for enterprise adoption and institutional change.
As more complex applications are being explored in the blockchain space, and also with-
in the context of interoperability, cross-chain interoperability standards are increasingly
needed. The standards could also be looked according to the different layers of techni-
cal architecture, e.g. platforms, applications or industry-specific data exchange, wallets
and key management. The following framework14 highlights these different layers, which
addresses various initiatives and efforts by standards development organizations (SDO)
in DLT standards:




13   
     “ISO/TC 307 Participation.” ISO. Accessed June 23, 2020. https://www.iso.org/committee/6266604.
     html?view=participation.
14   Lima, Claudio. “Developing Open and Interoperable DLT\/Blockchain Standards [Standards].”
     
     CSDL | IEEE Computer Society, November 2018. https://www.computer.org/csdl/magazine/
     co/2018/11/08625908/17D45XfSEUx.




Blockchain Interoperability					 The Current State of Blockchain Interoperability
     FIGURE 1: THE CLASSIFICATION OF BLOCKCHAIN STANDARDS




                                                                                  Industry Consortium, Alliance, Special Interest Groups



                                                                                                                                           Country-Based SDO



                                                                                                                                                               Global SDO
          DLT/Blockchain Generic Framework Standards Focused on Refer-
          ence Guide, Reference Frameworks, Architectures, Terminologies,
          Interfaces, Ontology, Classification, and So Forth




          DLT/Blockchain Enabling Technology Standards Focused on
          Client Interfaces, ID Management, Data Formats, Consensus
          Algorithm, Token Specifications, and So Forth




          DLT/Blockchain Platform-Specific Standards Focused on
          Ethereum, Hyperledger, Corda, and So Forth




12

          DLT/Blockchain Vertical-Industry-Specific Standards
          Focused on Energy, Health Care, Telecom/IT, Manufacturing,
          Supply Chain, and So Forth



     Source: Developing Open and Interoperable Blockchain Standards [Standards]



     Classification of blockchain standards and other related/like-minded efforts
     The World Economic Forum, in collaboration with other members of the Global Blockchain
     Council recently released a paper15, “Overview of Blockchain Technical Standards”, highlight-
     ing the need for blockchain technology standards and providing an overview of its current
     landscape. The paper maps the existing standardization efforts, and identify corresponding
     gaps and overlaps on blockchain standardization.
     Below is a non-exhaustive excerpt of the list of standard setting initiatives by formal standard
     setting bodies and blockchain specific industry groups, as highlighted in the WEF paper on:




     15    ttps://www.weforum.org/whitepapers/global-standards-mapping-initiative-an-overview-of-block-
          h
          chain-technical-standards




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
MAJOR STANDARD-SETTING EFFORTS - FORMAL ORGANIZATIONS


  ENTITY      GEOGRAPHY         PURPOSE                                            TOPIC


  IEEE        USA               The purpose of the Institute of Electrical and     Internet    of things
                                Electronics Engineers (IEEE) is promoting the      (loT); cryptocurrency
                                development and application of electrotech-        exchange and pay-
                                nology and allied sciences for the benefit of      ment; tokens; energy;
                                humanity, the advancement of the profession,       digital assets
                                and the well-being of its members


  ISO         Switzerland       The International Organization for Standard-       Security; identity
                                ization (ISO) is an independent, non-govern-
                                mental, international organization that devel-
                                ops standard to ensure the quality, safety and
                                efficiency of products, services, and systems


  W3C         USA               The Worldwide Web Consortium (W3C)                 Identity
                                is developing protocols and guidelines that
                                ensure long-term growth for the web


  IRTF        USA               The Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)            Identity;
                                aims to promote research for the evolution of      digital assets
                                the internet
                                                                                                               13
  IEC         Switzerland       The International Electrotechnical Commis-         Internet of things (IoT)
                                sion (IEC) promotes standardization of electri-
                                cal technology, electronic, and related matters


  IETF        USA               The purpose of the Internet Engineering Task       Cryptocurrency
                                Force (IETF) is creating voluntary standards       payment
                                to maintain and improve the usability and in-
                                teroperability of the internet


  ITU-T       Switzerland       The International Telecommunication Union          Security; IoT; indentity;
                                Telecommunications (ITU-T) sector ensures          DLT requirements
                                the efficient and timely production of standards
                                covering all fields of telecommunications and
                                information communication technology (ICTs)
                                on a worldwide basis, and defines tariff and ac-
                                counting principles for international telecom-
                                munication services


Source: World Economic Forum Global Blockchain Council – Overview of Blockchain Technical Standards




Blockchain Interoperability					 The Current State of Blockchain Interoperability
     MAJOR STANDARD-SETTING EFFORTS - INDUSTRY GROUPS


       ENTITY                        GEOGRAPHY        PURPOSE                                        TOPIC


       EEA                           USA              The Enterprise Ethereum Alliance               Interoperability;
                                                      (EEA) builds, promotes and broadly             tokens
                                                      supports Ethereum-based technolo-
                                                      gy methodologies, standards, and a
                                                      reference architecture


       Hyperledger                   USA              Hyperledger is an open-source communi-         Interoperability;
                                                      ty focused on developing a suite of stable     tokens
                                                      frameworks, tools, and libraries for enter-
                                                      prise-grade blockchain deployments
                                                      It serves as a neutral home for vari-
                                                      ous distributed ledger frameworks in-
                                                      cluding Hyperledger Fabric, Sawtooth,
                                                      Indy, as well as tools such as Hyper-
                                                      ledger Caliper and libraries such as
                                                      Hyperledger Ursa



       IWA                           USA              The InterWork Alliance (IWA) is work-          Tokens;
                                                      ing to: develop standards-based in-            analytics
                                                      terworking specifications; address
14                                                    market requirements and performance
                                                      metrics; support advances across all
                                                      platform technologies; and enable
                                                      multi-party interchanges


       JWG                           USA and UK       The Joint Working Group on interVASP           Tokens
                                                      Messaging Standards (JWG) identified
                                                      the need for VASPs to adopt uniform
                                                      approaches and establish common stan-
                                                      dards to enable them to meet their obliga-
                                                      tions resulting from the FATF recommen-
                                                      dations as they apply to affected entities
                                                      To tackle this, a cross-industry, cross-sec-
                                                      toral joint working group of technical ex-
                                                      perts was formed in December 2019 and
                                                      a new technical standard developed by
                                                      the group


       National Blockchain and       China            This is a group of organizations that          DLT requirements
       Distributed Accounting                         have joined a national committee fo-           DLT terminology
       Technology Standardiza-                        cused on creating standards for block-
       tion Technical Committee                       chain technology



     Source: World Economic Forum Global Blockchain Council – Overview of Blockchain Technical Standards




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
The approach standard-setting bodies will take will also be critical. Bringing together
various sectoral and technology experts and having a diverse representation among those
responsible for developing and maintaining ‘open standards’16 could be important for in-
teroperability and adoption.


Past projects and implementations in the financial sector
In recent years, several central banks have embarked on experimental projects and pilots to
explore the use of blockchain to enable cross-border interbank payments and settlements.
Although these projects are spearheaded by central banks, it is important to note the par-
ticipation of financial institutions and consulting companies in providing technological
solutions and prototypes at every stage of the development process, as well as rigorously
documenting each project’s technical aspects.
Project Ubin is a collaborative project and aims to help the Monetary Authority of Singa-
pore (MAS) and the financial industry to better understand the technology and the poten-
tial benefits it may bring through practical experimentation.17 The project explored the dif-
ferent phases of blockchain interoperability:18
    ed by MAS, Singapore Exchange, and Deloitte, Ubin Phase III considered utilizing DLT
•	 L
   to develop Delivery versus Payment (DvP) for the settlement of tokenized assets to
   achieve interledger interoperability and finality of DvP.
    n Ubin phase IV (also known as Jasper-Ubin), MAS and Bank of Canada (BoC) explored
•	 I
   cross-border and cross-currency payments using CBDC in domestic payment networks.
   They used HTLC, which connects two payment networks and allows Payment versus                           15
   Payment (PvP).
   n collaboration with J.P. Morgan and Temasek, MAS developed a prototype which ex-
•	 I
   changes different currency on the same blockchain network. This network will allow other
   blockchain networks to integrate and offer some functions to support certain payment
   transactions, e.g. DvP with private exchanges. Phase V is still under testing.


Project Stella – a joint research project undertaken by the ECB and the BOJ – aims to con-
tribute to the experimentation of blockchain technology, and evaluate the opportunities
and challenges for financial market infrastructure to support payments and securities set-
tlement. Reports on Phase II indicate that cross-ledger DvP could function, even without
connections between individual ledgers. HTLCs and digital signature “would be used to
achieve interoperability between ledgers.” 19



16   https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/ipr/Pages/open.aspx
17   “
      Project Ubin: Central Bank Digital Money Using Distributed Ledger Technology.” Monetary
     Authority of Singapore, November 20, 2019. https://www.mas.gov.sg/schemes-and-initiatives/
     Project-Ubin.
18   See Annex for an overview of the context in which the other phases took place.
19   K
      ishi, Michinobu. 2019. “Project Stella and the Impacts of Fintech on Financial Infrastructures in
     Japan.” Asian Development Bank, October 24. Available at: https://www.adb.org/publications/
     project-stella-impacts-fintech-financial-infrastructures-japan.




Blockchain Interoperability					 The Current State of Blockchain Interoperability
     THREE
     A Framework
     for Blockchain
16
     Interoperability




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
A Framework for
Blockchain Interoperability
The Business Perspective
Interoperability is increasingly becoming one of the most critical core concerns as gov-
ernments seek to deliver seamless public services and develop the digital strategies to
do so. Public administration could become inefficient, costly and fragmented if cross-sys-
tem communication is not achieved in the digital ecosystem. The European Interoperabil-
ity Framework highlights that a key aspect of the European ‘Digital Single Market’ is to
“guarantee the secure and free flow of data, develop standards and ensure interoperabili-
ty”.20 Among the reasons for this heightened focus on achieving ICT interoperability are its
potential benefits, e.g. increased competition, higher innovation, and more autonomy and
flexibility of choice.21
Blockchain technology has demonstrated its benefits and potential over the years. How-
ever, many organizations are still hesitant about its value for their operations and busi-
nesses. The lack of interoperability contributes to some of these uncertainties. It is clear
that the transfer of information from one blockchain to another is a big challenge; it is
also clear that organizations are cautious about relying on one vendor, and later finding
that they are unable to transfer data if they decide to switch vendors. However, in ad-
dition to technology interoperability, the organizations will also have to focus on busi-                             17
ness processes that would require to align with cross-organizational trust on respective
governance and business ecosystems. An example to illustrate this challenge could be
blockchain-enabled and shared “Know your Customer” (KYC) utility models.22 While in-
teroperable blockchain systems could lower the high costs associated with KYC, it would
nonetheless require new commercial and governance models to emerge for sharing KYC
across different financial institutions.
The core underlying infrastructure of the digital economy is experiencing changes and
shifts due to blockchain technology, as well as other emerging technologies. However,
there are challenges around standardization and interoperability, which are critical for the
successful scaling of these potential alternative market structures. Exchanging data as-
sets and exchange of value in the form of digital instruments between two counterparts is
relatively easy if they use the same blockchain platform. However, this is rarely the case:
most businesses operate different types of blockchain technologies, making the transfer
of digital assets an insurmountable challenge. The value of blockchain interoperability to
industry and enterprise networks is rapidly becoming evident in the context of a growing
digital economy, accelerated by the COVID-19 crisis.


20   https://ec.europa.eu/isa2/sites/isa/files/eif_brochure_final.pdf
21   https://cyber.harvard.edu/interop/pdfs/interop-breaking-barriers.pdf
22   https://assets.kpmg/content/dam/kpmg/xx/pdf/2018/03/kpmg-blockchain-kyc-utility.pdf




Blockchain Interoperability					                                        A Framework for Blockchain Interoperability
     An interoperable digital architecture is now imperative for the exchange of data and digi-
     tal assets in the digitalization of trade, e-commerce, or e-government services. Interoper-
     ability also has direct implications on an organization’s business model and its strategic
     positioning to deliver value. Some technology providers initially might be less focused on
     interoperability issues, as each one would like to grab a larger part of the market, especially
     those reliant on network effects. The emergence of multiple new alternatives, in addition to
     legacy instruments, could result in further fragmentation rather than solving the challenges
     if the issues around standards and interoperability are not addressed through multi-stake-
     holder coordination. Interoperability cannot result from the efforts of a single entity, rather
     it requires a governance group made up of all stakeholders active in this field. This gover-
     nance group will administer and make decisions on business agreements, legal terms and
     technical feasibility. This group will also manage the data standard of interoperability, such
     as smart contract, entities and digital assets.23 This governance model could help to estab-
     lish a business partnership, which is not constricted by technological limitations.


     The Technology Perspective
          So far, the notion of chain interoperability has seen much theory and little practice,
          primarily because a live example of successful chain interoperability requires not one,
          but two, already existing, stable and sufficiently powerful blockchains to build off, but
          this is slowly starting to change. -Vitalik Buterin (2016).
18
     Technology Approaches
     Technically, blockchain interoperability seeks to achieve one fundamental goal, namely
     ensuring the integrity of both information exchanges (data exchange among business sys-
     tems) and value transfers (digital assets exchange, e.g. crypto, tokens). Internet protocols,
     such as TCP/IP and APIs, have set good examples of achieving data interoperability. How-
     ever, value transfer has been an application-layer concern, and not a protocol-level concern
     in the traditional Internet context. With blockchain becoming the “Internet of Value”,24 en-
     suring the integrity of value transfer across different blockchains has become a problem to
     address at the foundation layer, and also needs to be considered at the blockchain network
     protocol level as well. In addition, there are attempts to create interoperability among dif-
     ferent blockchains at the middleware level, e.g., blockchain-agnostic smart contracts, e.g.
     DAML by Digital Asset Holdings, or Quant Network’s multi-blockchain DApps (MApps).




     23   Inclusive Deployment of Blockchain for Supply Chains: Part 6 – A Framework for Blockchain Interoperability:
          http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_A_Framework_for_Blockchain_Interoperability_2020.pdf
     24   Ripple. 2019. “The Internet of Value: What It Means and How It Benefits Everyone.” October 25. Available at :
          
          https://ripple.com/insights/the-internet-of-value-what-it-means-and-how-it-benefits-everyone/.




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Below are some popular technical means for achieving blockchain interoperability:

 1. Oracles and Notaries
 Oracles and notaries are trusted agents between different blockchains, or between a
 blockchain and the off-chain world. To achieve better resiliency and to increase trust, or-
 acles can adopt a decentralized architecture in the same manner as Chainlink.

 In a notary scheme, one or more trusted nodes agree to carry out an action on chain B
 when some event on chain A happens (Buterin, 2016). Trusted nodes are the key to no-
 tary schemes. One important feature of the notary scheme is its atomicity, meaning that
 a transaction needs to be all or nothing for all participants. The notary scheme has been
 implemented in the Atomic mode of the Interledger Protocol25 , whereby an ad hoc group
 of notaries are selected to support the execution of each payment by confirming the suc-
 cess or failure of the payment.


 2. Time-bound Asset Locking and Release
 To support the exchange of value across different blockchains in a trustless mode, assets
 can be locked on a blockchain ledger and released upon confirmation that the recipient
 is ready to receive the asset. This has been implemented in the Universal Mode of the
 Interledger Protocol and HTLC.
 In the Universal Mode of the Interledger Protocol, after a chain of participants has been
 selected for the value transfer, assets are locked on the corresponding ledger of each
 participant. Following confirmation by the final recipient of the value, the locked value is                      19
 released and transferred to the recipient by the operator on the last ledger. The last led-
 ger will then provide a payment confirmation to the previous ledger, which will unlock the
 asset and send it on, etc., until the ledger for the sender also receives the confirmation,
 unlocks the asset, and finalizes the deduction of this asset from the sender’s account. To
 prevent a liquidity starvation attack on any participant, all transactions are time-bound,
 with upstream ledgers allocating more time than the downstream ones.




25   Stefa Thomas & Evan Schwartz. A protocol for Interledger Payments. http://interledger.org/interledger.pdf




Blockchain Interoperability					                                     A Framework for Blockchain Interoperability
     In HTLC, hash locking between blockchain A and blockchain B can be achieved in three
     steps (Buterin, 2016):
            lockchain A generates a random secret s, and computes the hash of the secret,
       1. B
           hash(s) = h. Blockchain A sends h to B.

       2.Blockchains A and B both lock their asset into a smart contract with the following rules
          (A locks first, B locks after seeing A’s asset successfully locked).
          a. 
             On A’s side, if the secret is provided by B within 2X seconds, then the asset is trans-
             ferred to B; otherwise, it is sent back to A.
          b. 
             On B’s side, if the correct secret (i.e., the value whose hash is h) is provided within X
             seconds, then the asset is transferred to A; otherwise, it is sent back to B.

       3. 
          Blockchain A reveals the secret within X seconds to claim the asset from B’s contract.
          However, this also ensures that B learns the secret allowing B to claim the asset from
          A’s contract.
     Unlike in the notary scheme, hash locking does not require a pre-existing trust relationship
     between the two blockchains or with a third party.

       3. Sidechains/Relays
       Another approach to allow different blockchains to interoperate is to have an “integra-
       tion” blockchain to support the exchange of value and information between different par-
20     ticipating blockchains.
       In the sidechains-relay model, the relay chain is the integration layer. It can issue a token
       to be used for value exchange by all sidechains. The relay chain can offer smart contracts
       for different sidechains to interact with and exchange information. In addition, it generally
       provides a larger number of validation nodes than any of the sidechains, thereby provid-
       ing more robust security as it ensures that no double-spend is made on value exchanges.
       The information integrity is preserved as long as that information is part of the overall
       “block header” that is: (i) generated in some cryptographically authenticated way, most
       likely using Merkle trees; and (ii) recorded on the relay chain.
       Regarding information exchange, a smart contract on the relay chain can function as a
       light client for a specific sidechain, thus leveraging the sidechain’s standard verification
       procedure to verify any block headers that have been fed into the contract. Relays are
       very powerful as they can be used for asset portability, atomic swaps, and many other
       more complex uses.
       For example, Polkadot uses a relay chain to connect multiple sidechains known as para-
       chains, with each parachain being a blockchain. The Polkadot architecture is described in
       detail in the latter part of this paper.




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
 4. Application Layer Adaptors
 In order to facilitate the development of applications that may run on multiple block-
 chains, an abstraction layer can be created so that the business functions of the underly-
 ing blockchains can be exposed as common APIs.
 A blockchain-agnostic smart contract language can be another alternative to code the
 business logic and map the different underlying blockchain platforms. DAML is a smart
 contract language that enables distributed application development without having to
 decide what blockchain or distributed ledger platform to use. The creator of DAML, Dig-
 ital Asset, is working with partners to have DAML-based applications run on Corda, Hy-
 perLedger Fabric or Sawtooth, VMware Blockchain, and other platforms.
 Vottun’s technology exposes blockchain-specific smart contracts as common APIs, mak-
 ing it possible for applications to be built without having to target any particular block-
 chain network. Each API is mapped to an underlying blockchain smart contract function,
 which will execute on the specific blockchain. Vottun currently supports Hyperledger
 Fabric, Alastria, Quorum, and Ethereum.
 The Overledger platform by Quant Network, connects various blockchain networks, as
 well as legacy systems. The platform provides a blockchain-agnostic operating system
 for business applications to run. It currently supports Hyperledger Fabric, Corda, Ethere-
 um, Bitcoin, IOTA, EOS, and Ripple, either permissioned or permissionless, and provides
 Java and JavaScript SDKs for developers to develop applications to run on the platform.
 Quant Networks uses its own Dapps technology (Multi-blockchain Dapps or MDapps).
 LiquidApps provides a run-time middleware and developer SDK to enable the develop-                      21
 ment of decentralized applications that can run across multiple blockchain networks. It
 currently supports EOS, Ethereum, Telos, and sother blockchain networks.

Technical framework
The technical methods for interoperability can be categorized across two dimensions: just-
in-time vs. on-going interoperability, and direct vs. third-party interoperability. In the sec-
ond dimension, third-party can be an independent entity, e.g. a notary or oracle service
provider, or a blockchain network to which the interoperating parties must belong, such as
a sidechain or relay chain.


                           JUST-IN-TIME                       ON-GOING


  Direct                   Protocols, e.g. time-bound         Application layer adapters
                           asset locking and release


  Via a third party        Oracles, notaries                  Sidechain, relay-chain




Blockchain Interoperability					                           A Framework for Blockchain Interoperability
     When the team has this interoperability initiative, both value exchange and information
     exchange were explored technically. Blockchain is touted to be the foundation for “The
     Internet of Value” (or digital assets). In this exploration the exchange of value is singled
     out as a particularly important problem for blockchain interoperability. When it comes to
     exchange of information, it is referring to the scenarios where no digital assets changes
     hands as part of the cross-chain operation.
     Table 1 illustrates how two blockchains using the respective ledger technologies can
     exchange value or information based on current technologies.


     TABLE 1: VALUE EXCHANGE AND INFORMATION EXCHANGE USABILITY BETWEEN
     DIFFERENT BLOCKCHAIN PLATFORMS

       w                ETHEREUM/         CORDA               INTERLEDGER        POLKADOT                HYPERLEDGER
                        QUORUM                                                                           FABRIC


       Ethereum/        Value: HTLC      Value: HTLC         Value:              Value &                Value & Information:
       Quorum           Infor.: Oracle   Infor.: oracle26    Application         Information:           Application
                                                             layer adapter       Application            layer adaptor27
                                                                                 layer adapter

       Corda                             Value & Infor-      N/A                 Value & Informa-       Value & Informa-
                                         mation: Corda                           tion: Application      tion: Application
                                         Network as the                          layer adapter (to      layer adaptor
22                                       relay chain.                            be developed)

       Interledger                                                               N/A                    Value: Application
                                                                                                        Layer Adapter

       Polkadot                                                                  (There is only one     Value & Information:
                                                                                 Polkadot network)      Application layer
                                                                                                        adapter
                                                                                                        (to be developed)

       Hyperledger                                                                                      Value: HTLC
       Fabric                                                                                           Infor.: oracles,
                                                                                                        Events API, Joint
                                                                                                        network or channels

     Note: The shaded cells repeat the same information as in the right side of the diagonal line of the matrix(table).




     26    
           Wan, Clemens. 2019. “Unlocking Corda Ethereum Interoperability Pt 3.” Medium. March 15. Available at:
           https://medium.com/@clemens_wan/unlocking-corda-ethereum-interoperability-pt-3-15aa4de97e40.
     27    Ledger Insights. 2019. “Hyperledger Fabric Integrates Ethereum Smart Contracts.” October 29. Available at :
           
           https://www.ledgerinsights.com/hyperledger-fabric-integrates-ethereum-smart-contracts-evm-blockchain/.


     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Table 2 summarizes past projects and our explorations based on our technical framework.


TABLE 2: TECHNICAL APPROACHES USABILITY BETWEEN DIFFERENT
BLOCKCHAIN PLATFORMS AND PROJECTS

                     ETHEREUM/        CORDA         INTERLEDGER         POLKADOT          HYPER-            LEGACY
                     QUORUM                                                               LEDGER            SYSTEMS
                                                                                          FABRIC


     Ethereum/       HTLC:            HTLC:         Working             Application       EVM user          Oracles as
     Quorum          Working          Ubin          Group               layer adapter     chaincode         implemented
                     Group            (Phase        Explorations                          and Web3          by Chainlink29:
                     Explorations     IV)                                                 provider
                                      Jasper                                              support
                                                                                          in Fabric28


     Corda                            Corda         N/A                 N/A               DAML by           Corda Settler
                                      Network                                             Digital Asst      for payments
                                      is live                                             Holdings


     Interledger                                                        N/A               Hyperledger       Stronghold
                                                                                          Quilt (being      Platform30,
                                                                                          developed)        Gates
                                                                                                            Foundation
                                                                                                            Mojaloop,
                                                                                                            Project Stella
                                                                                                            Phase III
                                                                                                                              23

     Polkadot                                                           There is only     N/A               Adapter using
                                                                        one Polkadot                        Substrate:
                                                                        network                             Working
                                                                                                            Group
                                                                                                            Exploration


     Hyper-                                                                               Information:      It is being
     ledger                                                                               oracles           explored.32
     Fabric                                                                               or Events
                                                                                          APIs31.

Note: The shaded cells repeat the same information as in the right side of the diagonal line of the matrix (table).




28      Hyperledger Fabric Now Supports Ethereum” Hyperledgger, October 26,2018. Available at:
       “
       https ://www.hyperledger.org/blog/2018/10/26/hyperledger-fabric-now-supports-ethereum/.
    merican Crypto Association. 2020. “Kadena Collaborates with Chainlink in Hybrid Blockchain Oracle Integra-
29 A
   tion.”, May 19. https://www.americancryptoassociation.com/2020/05/19/kadena-chainlink-blockchain-oracle/.
30      edium. 2019. “Stronghold Platform Integrates with Interledger Payments Protocol.” Medium. Stronghold, May
       M
       16. https://medium.com/strongholdpay/stronghold-platform-integrates-with-interledger-payments-proto-
       col-cbdd5477e0f0.
31      Fabric@Lists.hyperledger.org: Multiple Fabric Networks.” fabric@lists.hyperledger.org | Multiple fabric net-
       “
       works. Accessed June 23, 2020. https:/  /lists.hyperledger.org/g/fabric/topic/17549956.
32      esrosiers, Luc, and Ricardo Olivieri. 2019. “Oracles: Common Architectural Patterns for Hyperledger Fabric.”
       D
       IBM Developer. IBM, March 11. Available at : https:/ /developer.ibm.com/technologies/blockchain/articles/ora-
       cles-common-architectural-patterns-for-fabric/.


Blockchain Interoperability					                                            A Framework for Blockchain Interoperability
     It should be noted that these technical solutions may need to be augmented with a semantic
     layer. In cases of information exchange, i.e. how each blockchain interprets the data, this may
     need to be coordinated off-chain. Similarly, when tokens are exchanged between blockchains,
     the “exchange rate” between two different tokens may need to be determined off-chain, unless
     there is an oracle for that exchange rate.


     The Security and Risk Perspective
     Blockchain projects employ different trust models. Public blockchains build trust based
     on cryptography, consensus algorithms and incentive models, e.g. proof-of-work and the
     considerable costs associated with attacking a network’s data integrity. Their security
     strength typically correlates to the number of nodes on the network. Blockchains rely heav-
     ily on membership management and traditional Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) to provide
     trust on the network. Their security mostly hinges on the established business relationship
     among the participants.
     When two blockchains interoperate, it is important to analyze the difference in their security
     models and introduce necessary compensating controls so that the integrity of information
     or value exchange would not be compromised for the two interoperating blockchains. This re-
     quires careful design of the interoperability interface. A good example is the way parachains
     leverage the strength of the relay chain in Polkadot.
     For information exchange, the critical security issue is the integrity and trustworthiness
     of the information from another chain or system. The 2019 Oracle attack on the cryp-
24
     to-asset platform Synthetic resulted in the loss of 37 million digital tokens within several
     hours, exemplifies this issue.33
     For value exchange, the key issues include: (i) the integrity of the information; (ii) the asset
     ownership and its intended action; and (iii) the value exchange’s execution being fair and
     atomic. The fairness ensures that both parties would get their part of the exchange, and no
     party should have an advantage in backing out of the transaction based on external events.
     A condition for interoperability resides in the ability for two systems to recognize each other’s
     identity schemes. Aiming for a common identity management is unrealistic, as they are intrin-
     sically linked to each chains’ cryptographic choices. On the other hand, one precondition for
     establishing trust is to establish some sort of mapping across identity schemes.
     From a risk perspective, a party may take on additional risks if it interoperates with another par-
     ty from a platform with a lower security and risk profile. Such additional risk must be carefully
     assessed and be deemed appropriate for the business benefit that would be achieved.




     33   Todd, Ryan. 2019. “Synthetix Suffers Oracle Attack, More than 37 Million Synthetic Ether Exposed.” Yahoo!
          
          Finance. Yahoo!, June 25. Available at : https://finance.yahoo.com/news/synthetix-suffers-oracle-at-
          tack-potentially-224737187.html.




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Table 3 summarizes the security factors to consider when two blockchains interoperate:

TABLE 3: SUMMARY OF SECURITY FACTORS

  COMPATIBILITY                 CONSIDERATIONS                         MEANS OF RECONCILIATION
  FACTORS


  Identity                      Some entity may have different         DIDs, proof of identity ownership.
                                identities on different blockchain.


  Cryptography                  Different   blockchains  may           Validation via a third party.
                                use different hash and digital
                                signature algorithms.


  Level of decentralization     Number of nodes and consensus          Risk/reward analysis; make adjust-
                                algorithms often vary between dif-     ment to participating blockchains
                                ferent blockchains.                    when feasible.


  Semantics layer               Interpretation of time, unit of        Combination of decentralized oracles
                                measurement and unit of val-           and offline agreements.
                                ue could be different across
                                different blockchains.




Legal Considerations
This report highlights selected legal considerations of our exploration on blockchain in-                              25
teroperability. Current legal frameworks for blockchain cover both the inputs and the out-
comes of the technology but not the technology itself. Blockchain interoperability could
yield additional layers of regulatory scrutiny as it will inevitably involve different jurisdic-
tions; explorations will assist regulators better understand the technology.
  Interoperability describes the ability of computer systems or software to exchange and
  make use of information.
The two main aspects to take into account in blockchain interoperability are the technolo-
gies involved and the legal dimensions. The technological aspects may be easier to over-
come. This can be illustrated by how emails evolved from once being limited to exchang-
ing messages within the same email network to now being able to exchange messages
across different email networks. Overcoming the technological gap to bridge interop-
erability is inevitable. It is already moving forward in the realm of cryptocurrencies.34
The legal aspects might be more challenging as the many existing legal frameworks reg-
ulating the same or similar purposes are already giving rise to conflicts, without adding
technology in the mix. It is not necessarily the medium of technology but its purpose and
implications which has surfaced the tensions with existing frameworks.




34   
     See Magas, Julia, “Crypto interoperability evolves: From blockchain bridges to DeFi transfers”, at https://
     cointelegraph.com/news/crypto-interoperability-evolves-from-blockchain-bridges-to-defi-transfers




Blockchain Interoperability					                                         A Framework for Blockchain Interoperability
     If two or more systems are exchanging information, the purpose of that exchange will drive
     which laws may apply. For example, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 in the United
     States regulated investments, “in whatever form they are made and by whatever name they
     are called”. Thus, as the Act points out the name of the instrument doesn’t matter, what
     matters is its nature. This was emphasized by panelists35 at the first panel on “Virtual Cur-
     rencies” at the CFTC TAC Meeting of 3 October 2019. Below are some of those key points:
       1. it is important to focus on the functions and features of the digital asset/stablecoin;
          as with any investment, there is a need to understand the nature of the instrument,
       2. 
           so one can assess the value, how to use it, and how to regulate it;
          it is important to look at the different types of stablecoins and identify what their
       3. 
          nature really is, regardless of what they are called/named; and
          the value of FINMA’s principle of “same risks, same rules” set forth on its recent
       4. 
          guidance on stablecoin.
     None of this, however, minimizes the complexities of trying to identify an instrument under
     the current regulatory environment. Such identification remains a challenge as it is impact-
     ed by, for example: (i) small permutations on the instrument; (ii) by the jurisdiction where
     the instrument is to be considered; and/or (iii) how the instrument is marketed since its
     issuance may have different purposes in different places, and therefore classifying it as a
     different instrument at different times. And this is just one example in one industry and in
     one country.
26   Thus, the main legal question to ask before even considering the technical interoperability
     of a proposed blockchain application is the exact purpose of the proposed blockchain ap-
     plication. Teams need to look beyond mere labels and:
       A. 
          analyze the essential characteristics of the proposed application to determine what it
          really is and, thus, what industry it relates to and what laws, regulations and/or com-
          pliance requirements may apply;
       B. 
          consider how it may impact market competitiveness as it may raise anti-trust issues
          depending on what it is going to do.
     Depending on the purpose of the blockchain application and the jurisdictions involved,
     there may be as many commonalities as there are divergences in laws and regulations.
     These may impose different requirements that may need to be implemented through
     technological controls, and which may subsequently impact the technical aspect
     of interoperability.
     The wide range of possible blockchain applications remain largely unregulated. In the
     meantime, relevant industry laws and regulations apply, regardless of the technology being
     used. For example: (i) financial laws will apply to blockchain applications for financial ser-
     vices; (ii) health and drug regulations will apply to blockchain applications used for health
     and drugs; (iii) consumer protection laws may also apply depending on the issue that arise


     35   The panelists included Gary DeWaal, Special Counsel, Chair, Financial Markets and Regulator; Katten
          
          Muchin Rosenman LLP; and Lee Schneider, General Counsel, block.one.




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
from the use of a blockchain application, etc. Current laws on cybersecurity, financial ser-
vices, privacy and data protection, money transfers or transmission licensing, to name but
a few, can and should, certainly apply to any technology.


Lessons from cryptocurrency
Cryptocurrencies have conferred celebrity status to blockchain technology. However, in
some cases it challenges the sovereign control of the state in issuing currencies. Reg-
ulating cryptocurrency became a necessity due to its potential impact in banking and
financial markets. A 2018 PWC survey of 600 executives in 15 countries reported that
48 percent of respondents considered that regulatory uncertainty is the most important
barrier to blockchain adoption.36
About 130 countries and some regional organizations have issued laws or policies on
cryptocurrencies.37 Out of 130 countries, nine have an absolute ban on cryptocurrencies,
while 16 countries have banned it an implicitly.38 While China and Lithuania implicitly ban
cryptocurrencies, they nonetheless are among 13 countries that have or are issuing na-
tional or regional cryptocurrencies.39 While countries such as Belarus, the Cayman Is-
lands, Luxembourg and Spain, do not recognize cryptocurrencies as legal tender, they
see a potential in the technology behind it and are developing a cryptocurrency-friend-
ly regulatory regime to attract investment in technology companies.40 Yet others accept
cryptocurrency as a means of payment, even by government agencies, as in the case of
the Swiss Canton of Zug and a municipality in the Canton of Ticino.41 The Isle of Man and
Mexico also allow the use of cryptocurrencies as a means of payment alongside their na-                            27
tional currency; Antigua and Barbuda allows the funding of projects and charities through
government-supported ICOs.42 



36   PWC, Blockchain is here. What’s your next move?, available at https://www.pwc.com/blockchainsur-
     
     vey?WT.mc_id=CT3-PL300-DM1-TR1-LS4-ND30-TTA5-CN_US-GX-xLoSBlockchain-ggl-nonbrand-
     ed&eq=CT3-PL300-DM1-CN_US-GX-xLoSBlockchain-ggl-nonbranded
37   Library of Congress, Regulation of Cryptocurrency Around the World, June 2018, available at https://www.
     
     loc.gov/law/help/cryptocurrency/world-survey.php?loclr=ealrr
38   Library of Congress, Legal Status of Cryptocurrencies, available at https://www.loc.gov/law/help/crypto-
     
     currency/map1.pdf. Countries with an absolute ban on cryptocurrency include Algeria, Bolivia, Egypt, Iraq,
     Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, United Arab Emirates, and Vietnam. Countries with an implicit ban on crypto-
     currencies include Bahrain, Bangladesh, China, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Indonesia, Iran, Kuwait,
     Lesotho, Lithuania, Macau, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Taiwan (China), and Thailand.
39   Library of Congress, Countries that Have or Are Issuing National or Regional Cryptocurrencies, available
     
     at https://www.loc.gov/law/help/cryptocurrency/map3.pdf. These countries include: Anguilla, Antigua
     and Barbuda, China, Dominica, Grenada, Ireland, Lithuania, Marshall Islands, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and
     Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Venezuela.
40   Library of Congress, Regulation of Cryptocurrency Around the World, June 2018, available at https://www.
     loc.gov/law/help/cryptocurrency/world-survey.php?loclr=ealrr
41   Ibid.
42   Ibid.




Blockchain Interoperability					                                     A Framework for Blockchain Interoperability
     Malta is leading a new approach as the first country in the world to provide regulations for
     blockchain operators, cryptocurrency and DLT, and became a safe and welcoming envi-
     ronment for blockchain initiatives.43,44 Understanding the need for legal certainty for com-
     panies to operate, Malta established: (i) an authority to certify DLT platforms and ensure
     credibility and legal certainty to users wishing to use DLT platforms; (ii) DLT arrangements
     and certifications of DLT platforms; and (iii) a regulatory regime for ICOs, cryptocurrency
     exchanges, and other related services.45 Other jurisdictions, including Bermuda, Gibraltar
     and the small town of Zug in Switzerland, are developing laws and regulations to attract
     cryptocurrency businesses.46
     Blockchain technology is actively used in Liechtenstein; on 16 November 2018, Liech-
     tenstein completed consultations on a proposed Law on Transaction Systems Based on
     Trustworthy Technologies (TT) (Blockchain Act).47 The Blockchain Act is Liechtenstein’s
     response to a demand for greater legal certainty in connection with blockchain.48 It in-
     tends to strengthen legal certainty for users and service providers to support the positive
     development of the token economy in Liechtenstein.49,50


     Liability and Disputes
     While laws and regulations may diverge, parties engaging and developing blockchain
     applications could potentially address any conflict of laws and jurisdiction through con-
     tractual obligations. Parties could agree that a specific set of laws and jurisdiction will
     apply in solving disputes among the parties and users. In this scenario, the parties would
28   be responsible for assessing the proposed legal system and jurisdiction to apply; users
     may need to read the agreements they are asked to adhere to before using a blockchain
     application. Without any such contractual agreement, parties would be left at the mercy
     of courts to decide which one would have jurisdiction. With blockchain’s decentralized
     nature that could entail a long and arduous legal battle, just only to determine where the
     dispute should be settled.




     43   Ibid.
     44   Forbes. 2018. Maltese Parliament Passes Laws That Set Regulatory Framework For Blockchain, Cryp-
          
          tocurrency And DLT, July 5. Available at https://www.forbes.com/sites/rachelwolfson/2018/07/05/
          maltese-parliament-passes-laws-that-set-regulatory-framework-for-blockchain-cryptocurren-
          cy-and-dlt/#7540d0e049ed
     45   Ibid.
     46   The New York Times. 2018. Have a Cryptocurrency Company? Bermuda, Malta or Gibraltar Wants You, July
          
          29. Available at https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/29/technology/cryptocurrency-bermuda-malta-gi-
          braltar.html, and Cointelegraph, Which Countries Are Best to Start Blockchain Projects?, August 9, 2018,
          available at https://cointelegraph.com/news/which-countries-are-best-to-start-blockchain-projects
     47    onsultation launched on Blockchain Act, August 29, 2018, available at http://www.regierung.li/en/
          C
          press-releases/212310
     48   Ibid.
     49   Ibid.
     50   Reference to the status of legislation and regulation in some of these and other countries in Appendix 2.




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Key Questions
Determining what type of blockchain is desirable is crucial in identifying what other con-
siderations need to be taken into account. Legal considerations on blockchain technology
may be amplified depending on whether the blockchain is public or private, permissionless
or permissioned. This is because on a public and permissionless blockchain environment
the decentralized nature of blockchain raises prominent legal concerns relating to the li-
ability, jurisdiction, applicable law, rights and obligations of its different actors, to name
but a few. In such an environment, actions and decision-making are likely to be spread out
geographically among numerous nodes located in different locations, as well as among
parties that may not be readily identifiable, if even possible to identify them in the first in-
stance. The inability to control illicit activities and malicicous actors, and identify responsi-
bility of the network poses a challenge. For instance, the WannaCry ransomware attack in
May 2017 demanded payment in Bitcoins. By receiving Bitcoin payments it is not possible
to know who owns those Bitcoins, even if the transaction has been executed in a public and
permissionless blockchain.51

The legal issues in a public and permissionless blockchain are clear:
     a. 
        Who is responsible for harm in a blockchain environment? Should it be the node oper-
        ators who are running the network, or the software developer, i.e. the one who codified
        the blockchain rules and/or protocols; or some other party?
     b. Who has legal personality in a blockchain?
     c. Which law applies since the “decision-makers” are in different locations?                                     29
     d. 
        Which jurisdiction has authority to hear and consider disputes in light of the different
        locations of all involved in a blockchain?

For now, these questions remain mostly unanswered. Courts will have to decide these is-
sues when they come before them at some future date and challenges are mounted against
the blockchain technology itself.
Broadly speaking, identifying the actors is easier in a private and permissioned block-
chain as it is privately owned and those on the blockchain are participating thanks to
someone’s permission to do so. There is control in a private and permissioned blockchain,
which makes it less problematic from a legal point of view. As private and permissioned,
one easily knows who controls the blockchain, who has access, where it is located (even
if in different locations), who acts and makes decisions on the blockchain. Being able to
identify who has control of a blockchain makes it possible to determine which jurisdiction
would have authority over a dispute, which law applies, and who may be responsible. This
is not to say that some of the broader questions disappear if the blockchain is private and
permissioned, rather it may make it easier to identify the actors in a public and permis-
sionless blockchain. Knowing the nature of the blockchain thus helps narrow down the
legal questions one should consider when working with blockchain technology.


51    “As with all such wallets, their transactions and balances are publicly accessible even though the cryptocur-
      
      rency wallet owners remain unknown”, at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WannaCry_ransomware_attack




Blockchain Interoperability					                                        A Framework for Blockchain Interoperability
     Any business considering a blockchain application must have clarity on:

       1.	 What type of blockchain is desirable? Should it be public network or private network?
       2.	 What industry does the proposed solution apply?
       3.	 What are the local laws that apply to the industry concerned?
       4.	
          What are mandatory requirements that need to be included in the design of the
          blockchain application?
       5.	
          How are such requirements going to be implemented on the blockchain? Are they
          different in different places? Will this impact the development of the application?
       6.	 What information will be captured and exchanged? Who will access the information?
       7.	 What is the desired privacy and data security for the solution?
       8.	 What is the data/information flow?
       9.	
          Is it possible for the application to have one full node in one location that will
          determined and/or reiterate the choice of jurisdiction among the parties to
          solve disputes?
       10.	
           If a blockchain application is chosen, what governance structure is best for governing
           the technology as it needs to adapt over time to remain relevant?



30




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
     FOUR
     Working Group
     Explorations and
32
     Lessons Learned




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Working Group
Explorations and
Lessons Learned
To obtain a deeper understanding of blockchain interoperability among different blockchain
platforms from a technical perspective, we explored three of the four technical approaches
described in Part II. The team implemented a token swap using HTLC between two differ-
ent Ethereum networks, and value transfer using Interledger protocol between Ethereum
testnet and XRP Ledger testnet. The team also looked at the Polkadot’s interoperability
capability between blockchain networks and legacy systems, as well as Corda’s example
of integrating with financial systems on issuing obligation and settlement. Additionally, the
team tried and implemented two interoperability methods for a project involving sovereign/
national governments.
A technical perspective of the explorations and lessons learned is presented below:

1. Hashed Time-Locked Contracts (HTLC)
An HTLC is a conditional transfer of value from a “depositor” to a “recipient” in which two
distinct conditions prevent immediate execution. The hashlock requires the proper “secret”
                                                                                                      33
to be presented to the blockchain before the timelock expiration; if this does not occur, the
value automatically returns to the “depositor.”
This allows two parties to exchange assets on independent platforms without a trusted
intermediary and securely, and thus enables Atomic Cross-Chain Swaps (ACCS), among
other useful functionalities.
During hands-on exploration, HTLCs for Ethereum native tokens swapping was explored
between two Ethereum networks. Firstly, the team tried this effort between Ganache and
public Ethereum testnet Ropsten. The HTLC was deployed to both networks and conduct
the token swap (see Figure 4).
For detail of this exploration, please refer to this link: https://github.com/GOOGZHOU/
htlc-lc-eth




Blockchain Interoperability				                      Working Group Explorations and Lessons Learned
        FIGURE 4: HTLC EXPLORATION PROCESS FLOW




34




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Additionally, the team explored the token swap on a Blockchain-as-a-service platform. This
service supports atomic swap, HTLC, and cross-token swapping. During the exploration,
two kinds of native tokens were generated in a private Ethereum network, and swapped
within the locked time.
From these hands-on explorations on HTLCs, we learned that there is no need for a third
party to accomplish the transaction. This aligns with the requirement to interoperate
without the need of a trusted intermediary. However, there are some assumptions and
conditions to accomplish HTLCs. One is that this relies on the two parties verifying the
smart contracts independently on both networks. Another one is that it still needs offline
communication on the timelocks set in the smart contract. The second party must set the
timelock and conclude the transaction ahead of the timelock set by the first party. During
this time, the assets or payments are locked and no party is able to move the assets or
payments. If the transation is a large one, it will generate a low-liquidity issue in reality,
and would thus require an efficient communication between two parties for transactions
to exchange digital assets.
A key recommendation going forward would be to develop a new technique, or method to
support messaging across different blockchain networks.

2. Interledger
Interledger is an open protocol, originally inspired by the Internet Protocol, for sending
payments across various blockchain networks. It enables the exchange of value across dif-
ferent payment networks. Using Interledger, the XRP can be sent to someone who wants to
receive ETH or USD can be sent to someone who wants to receive EUR. 52                                   35

Interledger routes packets of value in the same way as the Internet routes packets of in-
formation. Computers on the Interledger network are called nodes. Nodes can take one or
more of the following roles: sender, router, and receiver (see Figure 5).

FIGURE 5: INTERLEDGER NODES EXAMPLES




Source: Interledger Overview



52    nterledger. 2020. “Interledger Overview.” Accessed June 23, 2020. Available at: https://in-
     I
     terledger.org/overview.html.




Blockchain Interoperability				                         Working Group Explorations and Lessons Learned
     The settlement engine plays a crucial role in the Interleger network to support sending and
     receiving settlements between ledgers. One engine can manage several accounts and set-
     tle with many ledgers.
     The team tried to run three Interledger nodes connected to two blockchain testnets (Ethe-
     reum and Ripple XRPL: Party A, Interledger (acting as an intermediary node), and Party
     B. Party A sent Ether and Party B’s node received XRP, while a the third node acted as
     intermediary during the token exchange. To accomplish this, Party A with Ether needs to in-
     stall a settlement engine to transfer Ether from Ethereum testnet to the intermediary node
     through settlement engine for ETH (see Figure 6).

     FIGURE 6: INTERLEDGER EXPLORATION PROCESS FLOW




36




     Source: the working group




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
The Interledger project working team claims to create an “Internet of Value”. This is a very
promising for the payment domain. The Interledger team already developed several settle-
ment engines for different types of non-crypto payment, such as PayPal and mobile money.

3. Polkadot
Polkadot is built for a scalable, interoperable and secure blockchain network. It allows partic-
ular blockchains to interact with each other in a secure way. Polkadot uses the Relay Chain to
send message between blockchains in its ecosystem and host a group of parachains which
run their own applications. Below are the high-level architectures,53 which demonstrate the
basic concept of relay chain and parachain (see Figure 7).
Relay Chain is the main chain of the system. Parachains generate blocks for validators on the
Relay Chain before the blocks are validated and added to the finalized chain. Thus, the Relay
Chain provides security guarantees. Different parachains can run parallel transactions with-
out interference, resulting in Polkadot being potentially more scalable than a current PoS
system (see Figure 8).

FIGURE 7: PIECES OF POLKADOT




                                                                                                            37




Source: An Introduction to Polkadot




53    olkadot. 2020. “An Introduction to Polkadot.” April. Available at: https://polkadot.network/
     P
     Polkadot-lightpaper.pdf




Blockchain Interoperability				                            Working Group Explorations and Lessons Learned
     FIGURE 8: POLKADOT HIGH-LEVEL ARCHITECTURE




     Source: An Introduction to Polkadot


38
     Polkadot’s parent company, Parity, plans to release the production version in 2020. We
     plan to test Polkadot after its release. During the exploration, the team tested Substrate
     (a framework to efficiently build different blockchains by Parity) within a four-hour hack-
     athon. Substrate was developed to build blockchains which can easily connect to Polkad-
     ot. The lessons learnt in this exploration are that Polkadot:
     •	 Gives developers flexible options to do the implementation in a modular way.
     •	 Provides plenty of tools that help develop the blockchains fast.
         n its current status, even though it makes the development easy, it is still difficult to com-
     •	 I
        pare it with Ethereum which already has gained substantial momentum. Substrate re-
        quires developers to have specific skills, such as Ink!, smart contract language program-
        ming applications, such as the rust programming language.


     Substrate provides an interesting option known as “off-chain workers,” which integrates a
     blockchain node with existing systems. This option is similar to using oracles, but the off-
     chain workers provide a better alternative, especially with respect to security, scalability
     and infrastructure efficiency. Off-chain workers allow execution of long-running and pos-
     sibly non-deterministic tasks, e.g. Web requests, that would require longer than the block
     execution time. Off-chain workers have their own Wasm execution environment outside of
     the substrate runtime and they can also be initiated from the substrate runtime.




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Some examples of off-chain workers can be found at https://github.com/tomusdrw/
sub0-offchain-workshop     and     https://github.com/jimmychu0807/substrate-off-
chain-pricefetch

4. Corda Network Issuing Obligations and Settling with Cash
The Corda platform can be used to issue, transfer and settle obligations through its defined
contracts and API integrations. To settle an obligation with cash, the issuer of the obliga-
tion would require having Bank APIs integration for the issuer itself, and have a mapping
of bank accounts where the obligations will be settled. The idea for this exploration was to
understand how this process would work, and develop some foundational knowledge to
potentially further explore the Corda Token SDK. This exploration does not demonstrate
cross-chain interoperability as this is not settling obligations across two different block-
chains. However, it demonstrates potential integration with legacy financial institutions,
or legacy payment rails through APIs and settling on-chain obligations. The APIs were not
used in the demonstration, but cash and obligations were issued and settled on the Corda
network. The team believes that there is a potential of further explorations on Corda Asset
encumbrance, Corda token SDK, and Corda Settler.

5. Multilateral Sovereign and Trade Blockchain Project (WBG)
The multilateral sovereign and trade blockchain project at the WBG is an effort to ex-
plore the potential of Blockchain and qualify it as the go-to technology to address and
circumvent challenges associated with multilateral agreements. We demonstrated the
management of multilateral agreements by leveraging two separate Blockchain plat-
forms, namely the core chain and the service chain. These are described as under-                     39

 Multilateral Sovereign Blockchain (Core Chain) This network includes national or sov-
 ereign entities. For the purpose of this project, we have simulated the participation of
 China, Indonesia and Malaysia in the wider context of an FTA between ASEAN countries
 and China. These countries are represented by a node each and leverage the network to
 record multilateral agreements. The platform of choice in this case is Corda.

 Trade Blockchain (Service Chain) Here, we have simulated participation from the buy-
 er (in Indonesia), the supplier (in China), the transit hub (Malaysia), the respective sea-
 ports and the freight forwarder. For the sake of simplicity, both the buyer and supplier
 operate from two separate member accounts on the first node, the freight forward-
 er operates via a member account on the second node and the seaports operate via
 member accounts on the third node. The Blockchain platform used here is Ethereum
 (private instance).

The reference architecture for these Blockchain networks is as illustrated below:




Blockchain Interoperability				                      Working Group Explorations and Lessons Learned
     FIGURE 9: REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE




40




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
In Phase 1, the main purpose of the core chain was to track trade and transit agreements
between participating nations (China, Indonesia and Malaysia). The trade agreements
specified preferential tariff rates for certain goods over a given period of time, and a limit
on the quantity. Similarly, a multilateral agreement covering, among others, transit ar-
rangements allows for goods to be transported via the ports of a given country. Although
multiple nations can be part of this network, only the ones involved in a given trade or
transit agreement are privy to the details of an agreement.
As the name suggests, the service chain is intended to implement services, such as the
supply chain, trade finance and payments, while also governed by multilateral agree-
ments. For this project, we have taken an end-to-end procure to pay flow between the
buyer and supplier to demonstrate the service layer application. One of the key features
that allows for such governance and adherence to multilateral agreements is the interop-
erability between the two platforms. This was achieved that using Orchestrator service
at the API layer, as explained below.

FIGURE 10: ORCHESTRATOR AS AN APPLICATION ADAPTER




                                                                                                       41




The architecture deployed to achieve this can be divided into three logical components:
(i) Corda nodes and API in the core chain; (ii) the Ethereum nodes and API of the service
chain; and (iii) the Orchestrator, which is a Java application. The trigger for validation is
initiated by the supplier on the UI screen, this event makes an API call to the node service
on Ethereum with the relevant PO details. The node service, in turn, makes a call to the
Orchestrator application. Upon receiving the data, the Orchestrator will make an API call
to the web server corresponding to the Corda node that represents China. Next, the Web
server makes an internal RPC (Remote Procedure Calls) to the node’s vault to retrieve
trade and transit agreement for a two-way match with the PO data. The response is car-
ried back via the web server to the Orchestrator, and subsequently to the node service on
the Ethereum chain. Depending upon the response received, the smart contract for the
given PO updates its state to either ‘Accepted’ or ‘Invalid’.
In Phase 2, we employed Verifiable Credentials (VC) to demonstrate direct integration
amongst two different blockchain platforms (see Figure 11). In this context, the client
blockchain platform requests data from the counterpart blockchain platform and re-




Blockchain Interoperability				                       Working Group Explorations and Lessons Learned
     ceives it in form of a VC, thereby ensuring the correctness and authenticity of data
     without any dependency on external entities and systems, such an orchestrator. A VC
     is a data structure that contains credential metadata made up of information on the
     credential itself, e.g. issuer information, issuance date, etc. A set of claims are issued
     by the issuer with regards to a subject. This information is combined with the proof
     identifying the issuer, and ensures that the verifier of the credential can verify the
     authenticity of the credential.

     FIGURE 11: VERIFIABLE CREDENTIAL




42
     To use a VC, an issuer issues a verifiable claim to the holder. The holder presents the
     verifiable claim to the verifier. The verifier then checks the verifiable claim (see Figure 12).

     FIGURE 12: VERIFIABLE CLAIMS




     The issuer issues a VC to the holder. The holder can then present the VC to any verifier
     who needs to verify the claim(s) being made by the holder pertaining to the subject of the
     VC. The verifier can independently verify the VC.

     To use VCs, each network node should have the following capabilities:
       1.	 Accept data in the form of VC;
       2.	 VCs issued by trusted issuers; and
       3.	 Provide output in the form of a VC;




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
The usage of verifiable claims is demonstrated through the interaction between the Malay-
sian Port on the service chain with the Malaysian node on the core chain. The goods pass
through the Malaysian port which acts as a transit hub, before it reaches the buyer based
out of Indonesia. To ensure that the goods being transported are in line with the agreed
upon transit agreement between the three nations, the Malaysian Port issues a request for
transit agreement data in the form of a VC to the Malaysian sovereign node, and then ver-
ifies the validity of the transit agreement residing on the Malaysian sovereign node. Upon
receiving a positive response on parameters, such as tariffs, product code, validity, etc.,
the goods are forwarded to the shipping line for further transportation.
Table 4 summarizes the technical explorations of blockchain interoperability by this
working group.


TABLE 4: SUMMARY OF WBG’S TECHNICAL EXPLORATION OF
BLOCKCHAIN INTEROPERABILITY

 APPROACH          PROJECT                   BLOCKCHAINS INVOLVED              GOAL


 Oracle/Notary     Interledger PoC           Ethereum and Ripple               Value Exchange


                   Multilateral Blockchain   Corda and Ethereum                Information
                   Phase 2                                                     Exchange


 Sidechain/Relay   Polkadot PoC              Polkadot                          Information               43
                                                                               Exchange


 Time-bound        HTLC PoC – 1              Private Ethereum                  Value Exchange
 Asset Locking                               and public Ethereum
 and Release
                   HTLC PoC – 2              Two private Ethereum networks     Value Exchange


 Application       Corda Settler             Corda & Legacy                    Value Exchange
 Layer Adapter
                   Multilateral Blockchain   Corda and Ethereum                Information
                   Phase 1                                                     Exchange




Blockchain Interoperability				                         Working Group Explorations and Lessons Learned
     FIVE
     Concluding
     Thoughts and
44
     Implications for
     International
     Development


     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Concluding Thoughts
and Implications for
International Development
This White Paper has shown that blockchain interoperability is about sharing data (value
and information) across different blockchain networks and legacy systems. Blockchain
interoperability is seeing some important experimentation by central banks and technol-
ogy providers in cross-border payment areas. However, there are many other use cases
that will depend on having interoperability. For instance, with support from the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the
WBG has explored the role of Fintech in economic development, especially with respect
to financial inclusion. They looked at how smart contracts (one of the highly important
blockchain capabilities) can be leveraged in a wide range of microfinance transactions
covering supply chain finance, insurance and consumer credit. 54 In the exploration, one
of the key takeaways in effective smart contract deployment is the need for large-scale
connectivity with an external data source; the blockchain based smart contracts need
to interoperate with legacy systems for getting its data inputs in a reliable and secure
way. This case reveals the need of interoperability across different organizational infra-                 45
structures and data sources. The framework highlighted in this White Paper makes it
clear that a governance group is needed to oversee data sharing, monitor interoperabil-
ity standards from standard-setting bodies, refer to the technical framework to find an
appropriate approach, and examine security and legal framework to check the design
and implementation.
The global supply chain is said to have a lot of potential in leveraging emerging technol-
ogies, such as AI, Blockchain and the Internet of Things (IoT). The COVID-19 pandemic
has also brought the issue of cross-supply chain communications into focus. However,
the lack of connectivity of IoT devices and Blockchain systems have become barriers
because of the absence of common standards and interoperability. 55 These challenges
relating to standards will need to be resolved by standard-setting bodies.




54    orld Bank. 2020. “Smart Contract Technology and Financial Inclusion.” Open Knowledge Re-
     W
     pository. World Bank, Washington, DC. Accessed June 23, 2020. Available at: https://open-
     knowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33723.
55    iforos, Marina. 2019. “Bridging the Trust Gap: Blockchain’s Potential to Restore Trust in Artifi-
     N
     cial Intelligence in Support of New Business Models.” International Finance Corporation (IFC),
     October.




Blockchain Interoperability								Executive Summary
     Among various explorations by the World Bank teams, the e-Procurement and disburse-
     ment traceability use case exploration is very relevant in the interoperability discussion.
     In the disbursement traceability use case, the team is exploring blockchain-enabled
     grants and loan disbursements to client countries for WB funded projects. The success
     would depend on how these could be operationalized by the country government either
     to complement their financial management systems or become an alternative to frag-
     ile and lease developed countries for their financial management and procurement sys-
     tems. Concerned stakeholders include donors, the World Bank, governments, project
     intermediaries, suppliers and contractors, and ultimately the beneficiaries. In addition to
     this, there is another exploration of blockchain-enabled e-procurement systems which
     is looking into modernizing and making the procurement systems more efficient. Going
     forward, there might be a need for these two different systems to be able to have data
     exchanged across chains and be able to interact with each other.
     Interoperability can be a complex issue because it is needed between different instanc-
     es of the same blockchain platform, between different blockchain platforms, and then,
     of course, between those blockchain platforms and remaining systems with legacy inter-
     faces. With blockchain systems, interoperability is more difficult, as it is significantly dif-
     ferent than existing isolated data environments where you can agree on the transfer of
     data. Blockchain entails more than this as it involves transfering state and provenance,
     which is much more complex than simply the data fields. Is it about data provenance or
     about control flow? In fact, it covers all of these. The idea of a heterogonous future state
     with more than one tech platform is inevitable. Ensuring they can work together is key.
46   How to validate something from one blockchain to another blockchain is important.




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Glossary
BITCOIN
Blockchain protocol developed by Satoshi Nakamoto


BLOCKCHAIN
A ledger where data is organized into blocks linked by a cryptographic hash


CONSENSUS MECHANISM
A mechanism that verifies that the information that is placed in a blockchain is valid


CRYPTOGRAPHY
Technique for secure communication


DIGITAL SIGNATURES
Mathematical scheme to verify the authenticity of digital messages or documents


ENCRYPTION
Encoding message in such a way that only authorized parties can access it                      47


ETHEREUM
Decentralized platform for application that are expected to run exactly as programmed


FORK
A split in a blockchain that results in the formation of a new chain


HASH
Cryptographic hash function used in the verification of the authenticity of data


HYPERLEDGER
A multi-project open source collaborative effort hosted by The Linux Foundation,
created to advance cross-industry blockchain technologies




Blockchain Interoperability								                                                Gloassary
     MINING
     Process of adding a record to a blockchain ledger


     NODES
     A device on a blockchain network


     PEER-TO-PEER NETWORK
     A network made of computers that are connected to each other whole being
     equally privileged


     PROOF-OF-WORK
     A technique for combatting e-mail spam by requiring proof of computational effort


     SMART CONTRACT
     Autonomous agent that live within the Ethereum execution environment of virtual
     machine. Other platforms do also make use of smart contracts e.g. Hyperledger


     HASH TIME-LOCKED CONTRACT (HTLC)
     A smart contract that enables the implementation of time-time bound transactions

48   NOTARY NODE
     A notary is a service that provides transaction ordering and timestamping


     TOKENS
     A token is a symbol whose value does not depend on mining. A token is not a coin.


     STANDARDS DEVELOPING ORGANIZATION
     An organization whose primary activities are developing, coordinating, promulgating,
     revising, amending, reissuing, interpreting, or otherwise producing technical standards
     that are intended to address the needs of a group of affected adopters




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Endnotes
TABLE 5: BLOCKCHAIN INTEROPERABILITY DEFINITIONS

 AUTHORS (YEAR)          DEFINITION


 Hardjono, Lipton, and   Interoperable blockchain architecture is a composition of distinguishable block-
 Pentland. MIT (2018)    chain systems, each representing a distributed data ledger, where transaction ex-
                         ecution may span multiple blockchain systems, and where data recorded in one
                         blockchain is reachable and verifiable by another possibly foreign transaction in a
                         semantically compatible manner.
                         https://arxiv.org/pdf/1805.05934.pdf


 Lima. IEEE (2019)       “Transfer[ing] value, assets, and tokens between…multiple platforms”
                         https:/ /www.standardsuniversity.org/e-magazine/may-2019-volume-9-issue-1-
                         blockchain-standards/distributed-ledger-technology-dlt-blockchain-interopera-
                         bility-standards/


 Buterin. R3, (2016)     [The capability to] move assets from one platform to another, or payment- ver-
                         sus-payment and payment-versus-delivery schemes, or access information from
                         one chain inside another (e.g. “identity chains” and payment systems may be a
                         plausible link)… without any additional effort required from the operators of the
                         base blockchain protocols.
                         https://www.r3.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/chain_interoperability_r3.pdf              49

 GS1, IBM (2018)         Leveraging common standards for identification and for data sharing.
                         1. Globally unique, persistent identification for organisations, locations, and things
                         2. A standardised language for supply chain events
                         3. A scalable network governance model that crosses ecosystems.
                         https://www.gs1.org/sites/default/files/bridging_blockchains_-_interoperabili-
                         ty_is_essential_to_the_future_of_da.pdf


 EU Blockchain           The ability to exchange data with other platforms, including those running
 Observatory             different types of blockchains, as well as with the off-chain world.
 and Forum (2019)        https://www.eublockchainforum.eu/sites/default/files/reports/report_scalaibili-
                         ty_06_03_2019.pdf




Blockchain Interoperability									 Endnotes
50
     Appendices




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Appendix One:
Cross-Border Payments
& Settlement and Current
Interoperability Initiatives
This appendix reviews the increasingly discussed use case of cross-border payments in-
volving blockchain technology. Addressing the cost and slow execution of cross-border
payments and settlement has been a major motivation for projects, such as Bitcoin, Rip-
ple or Libra, as well as some central bank-led projects on wholesale CBDC interoperabil-
ity, e.g. Ubin, Jasper or Stella. From a technology perspective, the main issues with the
current systems include the lack of standardized payment status capability, incompati-
ble real-time gross settlement (RTGS) systems that don’t operate 24/7, and reliance on
too many intermediaries operating with their legacy systems. Central banks have start-
ed to study both retail and wholesale Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDC), and other
rapid payment and settlement systems (e.g. TIPS in Europe).
Central banks have also collaborated across their various wholesale CBDC projects to
study the question of interoperability. In the paper “Cross-Border Interbank Payments        51
and Settlements paper” 1 and Jasper-Ubin (2019) 2, the authors explained how wholesale
CBDC coupled with the use of blockchain could address most of the cross-border pay-
ments pain points.


MODEL 3C: A SINGLE, UNIVERSAL W-CBDC BACKED BY A BASKET
OF CURRENCIES




Source: Cross-Border Interbank Payments and Settlements




Blockchain Interoperability								                                           Appendix One
     Project Jasper (Bank of Canada)
     Project Jasper started as an initiative in March 2016 between the Bank of Canada, R3
     Lab and Research, Payments Canada, and other domestic financial institutions. All
     parties sought together as an industry to study DLT for interbank payments in Canada.
     Since the initiation of Project Jasper, there have been three phases of experimentation
     contributing to the development of a proof of concept leveraging wholesale central bank
     digital currency (W-CBDC) and DLT for interbank payment settlements.

     Jasper Phase I: Project Jasper Primer (March 2016 to June 2016)
     This collaborative public-private research initiative aimed to understand how DLT could
     transform the wholesome payments system. An Ethereum-based interbank transfer pro-
     totype was developed at this phase. The goals were described as follows 3:
       “Build a proposal for a central bank-issued digital currency, including issuance, trans-
       fer, settlement, and destruction.
       Leverage rapid prototyping to test and validate the business, operational and techni-
       cal hypotheses.”

     The Bank of Canada has also tested digital depository receipts (DDR) as a digital rep-
     resentation of Canadian currency in 2016 and 2017. In the context of Project Jasper,
     DDRs took the form of “CADcoin” issued by the Bank of Canada to better understand
     the potential impacts of blockchain technology on financial market infrastructure (FMI).

     Jasper Phase II (December 2016 to April 2017)
     Building on the learning outcomes of Phase I, Phase II focused on rebuilding the plat-
52   form using an alternative form of DLT to test further the efficiency of this technology for
     the clearing and settlements of high-value interbank systems. 4 Jasper, therefore, transi-
     tioned to a Corda DLT platform, which consequently introduced the “notary node” con-
     cept at the core of its consensus protocol. This platform was exclusively built in a test
     environment only, and there was no integration with external systems.
     The Phase II platform was built to accommodate multiple settlement options. The two
     settlement options by the platform are the “atomic” option and the liquidity-saving mech-
     anism (LSM) option. This mechanism allows participants to coordinate their payments to
     reduce liquidity needs, through batches of queues payments. 5 Netting promotes funding
     efficiency and enables a smoother intraday flow of payments.
     A key conclusion of Jasper Phase II was that the material benefits of a DLT-based finan-
     cial system might be realizable if the scope of the DLT system included the settlement of
     multiple assets.

     Jasper Phase III: Securities Settlement using DLT
     Jasper Phase III explored the potential benefits of integrating this “cash on ledger” with
     other assets, such as foreign exchange and securities. By extending Phase II’s proof
     of concept, it now allowed for immediate cleaning and delivery-versus-payment settle-
     ments, demonstrating the possibility of completing post-trade settlement on a DLT plat-
     form. The ability to settle transactions immediately significantly reduces counterparty
     risk and frees up collateral.




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Project Ubin. Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS)
Project Ubin aimed to help MAS and the industry better understand the technology and
the potential benefits it may bring through practical experimentation.

Ubin Phases I, II and III
In partnership with R3 and a consortium of financial institutions, MAS started Project
Ubin to support “the creation of open Intellectual Property and foster collaboration be-
tween industry players, creating a vibrant, collaborative, and innovative ecosystem of
financial institutions and FinTech companies.”6
Phase I served as the foundation to assess the feasibility and implications of DLT and to
identify the elements required for future, and phase II focused on solving transactional
privacy and deterministic finality, and most critically, the ability to perform multilateral
netting capabilities in a decentralized manner.
Led by MAS, Singapore Exchange and Deloitte, Phase III considered utilizing DLT to de-
velop Delivery versus Payment (DvP) for the settlement of tokenized assets to achieve
interledger interoperability and finality of DvP.

Ubin Phase IV: Cross-border payment-versus-payment (PvP)
In Phase IV, MAS and BoC linked their respective experimental domestic payment net-
works by the announcement of Project Jasper-Ubin in May 2019. This experience was
deemed successful on cross-border and cross-currency payments using CBDC.

Ubin Phase V: Enabling Broad Ecosystem Collaboration
Project Ubin is currently determining the commercial viability and value of the
blockchain-based payments network and is undergoing industry testing to                         53
determine its ability to integrate with commercial blockchain applications.




Blockchain Interoperability								                                              Appendix One
54



     Source: Enabling Cross-Border High Value Transfer Using Distributed Ledger Technologies




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
Project Stella
The Bank of Japan (BOJ) and the European Central Bank (ECB) together launched
Project Stella in December 2016, which studies the possible use of DLT for financial
market infrastructures. Like Jasper and Ubin, Project Stella was developed through
development phases.

Stella Phase I and II
In Project Stella’s Phase I, the BOJ and the ECB conducted experiments to determine
“whether specific existing functionalities of their respective payment systems could
be run in a DLT environment in an efficient and safe manner”. In Phase II, project Stella
sought to gain practical understanding of DvP functioning on DLT thanks to prototypes
developed on three different DLT platforms: Corda, Elements and Hyperledger Fabric.
Reports indicate that “DvP can run in a DLT environment subject to the specificities of
the different DLT platforms”. Depending on the use case, the design of DvP can be in-
fluenced by a number of factors, including “the interaction of the DvP arrangement with
other post-trade infrastructures.7
They concluded that DLT offers a new approach for achieving DvP between ledgers,
which does not require any connection between ledgers thanks to “cross-chain atomic
swaps,” which can help ensure interoperability between ledgers. Cross-ledger DvP ar-
rangements on DLT can be complex and can give rise to additional challenges that would
need to be addressed. Legal aspects, which have not been part of this study, would need
to be further explored.

Stella Phase III: Synchronizing cross-border payments (June 2019)
Following the two previous phases, Project Stella examined how cross-border payments             55
could be improved. “Cross-border payments are payments between currency areas
that involve various entities across multiple jurisdictions. Compared with domestic pay-
ments, they are often characterized as slow and costly”.
Phase III identified a new approach for settlement across ledgers through HTLC, which would
potentially “allow the mitigation of credit risks through the synchronization of settlements”.
The BOJ and ECB conducted experiments involving synchronizing payments between DLT
ledgers, between centralized ledgers, and between DLT and centralized ledgers.8
The findings indicate that “only payment methods with an enforcement mechanism
[through a smart contract], either through the ledger itself or through a third party, can
ensure that the transacting parties that completely satisfy their responsibilities in the
transaction process are not exposed to the risk of incurring a loss on the principal amount
being transferred”. Although experiments applying a payment method with HTLC proved
the technical feasibility of synchronized settlement between different types of ledgers,
further reflections on legal and compliance issues have been raised.

Stella Phase IV: Balancing confidentiality and auditability in a DLT environment
Phase IV focused itself on privacy-enhancing technologies/techniques (PETs) as chal-
lenges arise when auditing transactions in DLT-based financial market infrastructures,
while also limiting access to information by third parties to ensure the confidentiality of
the payment system.




Blockchain Interoperability								                                               Appendix One
     Appendix Two:
     Regulatory Environment
     This appendix reviews in detail some of the regulatory environment related to
     blockchain in the United States and around the world.


     Regulatory Environment
     Blockchain technology has been subject to regulatory scrutiny, part of which seems
     to result from what the blockchain application offers as a product and the risks that it
     may circumvent applicable laws. Lack of familiarity with the blockchain technology will
     certainly lead to heightened scrutiny as we do not know whether the technology fulfills
     relevant legal and regulatory requirements. Still, it has also gained enough support to
     prompt regulators to either pass new laws, or attempt to fit blockchain technology devel-
     opments within existing legal frameworks.
     The clearest example of the latter is the way government authorities treat digital assets,
     e.g. Bitcoin, under their existing laws. In the United States, early initial coin offerings
     (ICOs), which offered retail investors the opportunity to invest in the development of new
     blockchain projects, raised the question of whether these fundraising projects could be
56   regulated by established securities laws. The United States Securities and Exchange
     Commission (SEC) was slow to act on this question, but eventually took a step toward
     answering the question in the affirmative by bringing enforcement actions under existing
     securities laws against startup companies offering ICOs.




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
It is illegal to sell a security in the United States unless the security is registered with
the SEC or is exempt from registration. The definition of “security” is set forth in the
Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Generally, the courts
have applied a four-part test to determine whether investment contracts are securities:
whether the arrangement involves: (i) an investment of money; (ii) a common enterprise;
(iii) the expectation of profits; and (iv) the expectation of profits is to be derived from the
efforts of others. If these elements are present, the arrangement is a security and must
either be registered with the SEC or be exempt from registration.
The SEC has applied this established test to digital assets. It proceeded to bring en-
forcement actions against Airfox and Paragon, two start-up companies, for failing to
register their ICOs as securities under federal law. The companies settled the charges
and agreed to register the securities, pay a fine and return money to investors. The SEC
settled another enforcement action with EtherDelta, a token trading platform, soon
thereafter. It was the SEC’s first action “based on findings that [the] platform operated
as an unregistered national securities exchange.”




                                                                                                  57




These examples show that regulators will apply existing legal frameworks to regulate
Blockchain based on the nature of the product being offered. Accordingly, developers
and practitioners must consult existing laws in the relevant industry before adopting
blockchain technology solutions.




Blockchain Interoperability								                                                Appendix Two
     On the other hand, and apart from being subject to existing legal frameworks, Blockchain
     technology also has the potential to enhance an industry’s ability to comply with applica-
     ble regulations. In the area of healthcare, the Health Insurance Portability and Account-
     ability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) regulates the United States healthcare industry. Among other
     provisions, the law codified the Privacy Rule, which governs the use and disclosure of pa-
     tient health information (known as “protected health information” or PHI), and sets stan-
     dards for patients to understand and control how their PHI is used. Blockchain technology
     can be used to great effect to enhance compliance with the Privacy Rule. As others have
     noted, a patient’s identity and records could be stored on a private, permissioned block-
     chain and private keys could be used to transfer data or information in a secure manner.
     In addition to fitting blockchain technology applications in existing legal frameworks, a
     number of United States jurisdictions have passed blockchain-specific laws that aim to
     encourage the adoption and use of blockchain within their borders. The following is a
     summary of laws that are at the forefront of this rapidly developing area:

       ARIZONA: In 2017, Arizona passed HB 2417, which allows the use of smart contracts in
       commerce and prohibited contracts from being denied legal validity because the con-
       tract contains a smart contract term. The bill recognizes records secured using block-
       chain as valid records under state law. Tennessee passed similar legislation in 2018.

       DELAWARE: Thanks to its business-friendly laws, more than half of publicly traded
       companies in the United States are incorporated in Delaware. Accordingly, Delaware
58     took an early interest in incorporating blockchain developments into its existing corpo-
       rate laws. In 2017, it amended its general corporation law to allow companies to maintain
       their corporate records, including stock ledgers, using blockchain technology.

       VERMONT: In 2018, Vermont was the first in the country to allow blockchain-based lim-
       ited liability companies (BBLLC). The idea, similar to traditional limited liability compa-
       nies, is to allow companies that use blockchain technology as a material part of their
       business activities to protect its members from legal liability. A BBLLC may customize
       its governance structure using blockchain technology and validate and store records on
       a blockchain. The Act also directed Vermont’s Department of Financial Regulation to ex-
       plore the use of blockchain technology in different industries and to identify regulatory
       changes that would allow blockchain to be adopted in those industries.

       WYOMING: In 2019, Wyoming was one of the first states to adopt a series of block-
       chain-friendly measures aimed at bringing blockchain business to the nation’s least
       populous state. Wyoming laws: (i) create an exception from state securities laws for
       blockchain tokens; (ii) make virtual currency exempt from money transmitter rules;
       (iii) recognize distributed-ledger-based corporate recordkeeping; (iv) exempt virtual
       currency from property taxes; and (v) recognize a form of limited liability company (the
       “series” LLC) conducive to blockchain businesses.




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
In addition, various United States jurisdictions have launched their own projects to ex-
plore the use of blockchain, rather than simply regulate its usage by private actors.
The states of Delaware, Illinois, and Colorado, among others, have launched initiatives
to shift state records to distributed ledgers. More broadly, in 2019, nearly every state
in the US had a blockchain-related bill sponsored and introduced to the legislature,
proving that this rapidly evolving area needs continuous monitoring to keep pace with
changing regulations.
Globally, a number of countries have raced to court blockchain business by creating or
amending regulatory frameworks:

 MALTA: Also known as “Blockchain Island,” this small island nation in the Mediter-
 ranean adopted a “complete regulatory framework” in 2018, which was “designed
 to make Malta one of the most desirable locations to set up shop in the blockchain
 space.”The laws established the Malta Digital Innovation Authority, certified DLT plat-
 forms, set up exchanges and other companies in the cryptocurrency market, and es-
 tablished a regulatory regime governing cryptocurrency and ICOs.
 SWITZERLAND: This European nation known for its banking and finance industries
 recently amended several existing laws to accommodate blockchain technology devel-
 opments. Among other things, the amendments establish a legal basis for exchanging
 digital securities and for recovering digital assets from bankrupt companies.
 LICHTENSTEIN: Lichtenstein passed new laws and amended existing laws in order to
 allow rights and assets to become tokenized, thereby allowing the development of the       59
 so-called token economy.
 UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (UAE): In 2018, the UAE announced the Emirate Block-
 chain Strategy 2021, a plan to shift at least 50 percent of government-related trans-
 actions to DLT platforms by 2021. The country’s ambitious effort, expected to greatly
 increase efficiencies through reduced transaction costs, work hours and resource use,
 is a novel approach to incorporating blockchain-based solutions into everyday life.
 Specific projects include using blockchain technology for logistics and to record land
 ownership. The country was an early leader in regulating businesses operating using
 Blockchain technology, issuing guidelines for ICOs in 2017 and establishing an author-
 ity to regulate digital assets.
 JAPAN: Despite high-profile hacks in Japanese cryptocurrency exchanges, Japan
 encourages blockchain technology through constantly evolving laws and regulations.
 Since 2016, Japan has officially recognized cryptocurrency as legal tender and there-
 by regulates cryptocurrency under its financial regulatory authority. The generally
 friendly blockchain environment has encouraged Japanese exchanges to self-regu-
 late, which allows them to quickly respond to evolving security threats such as hacks.
 Following perhaps inevitable conflict between exchanges and anti-money laundering
 policies, however, Japan recently banned privacy coin trading.




Blockchain Interoperability								                                          Appendix Two
         SINGAPORE: The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) was an early regulator of
         cryptocurrency. MAS’s approach is to “regulate the space to prevent stifling innovation,
         while simultaneously protecting investors and the public at large.” MAS is participat-
         ing in Project Ubin, which creates a digital token for the Singapore dollar on Ethereum.
         Singapore recently passed the Payment Services Act, which streamlines regulations
         for payment services, including cryptocurrency and exchange services. Payment ser-
         vice providers required to obtain licenses must meet anti-money laundering and coun-
         tering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) requirements. MAS has issued AML/CFT
         guidelines specific to digital payment token services.

     The opportunities behind digital inclusion have also created a need for development or-
     ganizations with a focus on economic development and trade to establish agile tech-
     nology-specialist teams. These teams have become privy to deliver concise advice on
     technology matters in various disciplines: business, economics, legal, and technical.
     Examples of these teams include the World Bank Group Technology & Innovation Lab,
     the IMF’s Digital Advisory Unit, IDB (IDB Lab). Other intergovernmental organizations
     working to promote economic cooperation, such as OECD (Blockchain Policy Forum),
     WEF (Center for the Fourth Industrial Revolution), as well as the European Commission
     (Blockchain Observatory), have dedicated many working groups to research how growth
     can flourish through future technological developments. Many of these working groups
     strive to produce knowledge pieces for the public to evaluate and inspire the activities of
     these innovation teams. In addition, international conferences are regularly to capture
60   the various learnings being carried out in various institutions. Nevertheless, there is no
     universal standard for Blockchain applications that could potentially facilitate interop-
     erability at the moment. Such a space is open for exploration, development, and in need
     of leadership to pave the way.




     ENDNOTES
     1     uthored by the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Monetary Authority of Singapore, HSBC
          A
          and a group of other commercial banks in the United Kingdom, Canada, and Singapore https:/ /www.
          mas.gov.sg/-/media/MAS/ProjectUbin/Cross-Border-Interbank-Payments-and-Settlements.pdf
        ttps:/
     2 h       /www.mas.gov.sg/-/media/MAS/ProjectUbin/Jasper-Ubin-Design-Paper.pd-
       f?la=en&hash=437222C94FD39314FB4C685EA31FC3AAA5CA5DA1
     3 https://www.payments.ca/sites/default/files/29-Sep-17/jasper_report_eng.pdf	
        ayments Canada (2017) “A Canadian Experiment with Distributed Ledger Technology for Domestic
     4 P
       Interbank Payments Settlement”
        nternational Monetary Fund (2019) “FinTech in Sub-Saharan African Countries: A Game Changer?”
     5 I
        ttps:/
     6 h       /www.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/sg/Documents/financial-services/sg-fsi-project-
       ubin-report.pdf
     7 https://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/release_2018/data/rel180327a1.pdf
     8 https://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/release_2019/data/rel190604a1.pdf




     WBG ITS Technology & Innovation Lab
